Special Publication 800-39 
Managing Information Security Risk Organization, Mission, and Information System View
https://ws680.nist.gov/publication/get_pdf.cfm?pub_id=908030
________________________________________________________________________________________________ 

1. Managing risk is a complex, multifaceted activity that requires the involvement of the entire
organization—from senior leaders/executives providing the strategic vision and top-level goals
and objectives for the organization; to mid-level leaders planning, executing, and managing
projects; to individuals on the front lines operating the information systems supporting the
organization’s missions/business functions. Risk management is a comprehensive process that
requires organizations to: (i) frame risk (i.e., establish the context for risk-based decisions); (ii)
assess risk; (iii) respond to risk once determined; and (iv) monitor risk on an ongoing basis using
effective organizational communications and a feedback loop for continuous improvement in the
risk-related activities of organizations. Risk management is carried out as a holistic, organizationwide
activity that addresses risk from the strategic level to the tactical level, ensuring that riskbased
decision making is integrated into every aspect of the organization.13 The following
sections briefly describe each of the four risk management components. 

2. Establishing a realistic and credible
risk frame requires that organizations identify: (i) risk assumptions (e.g., assumptions about the
threats, vulnerabilities, consequences/impact, and likelihood of occurrence that affect how risk is
assessed, responded to, and monitored over time); (ii) risk constraints (e.g., constraints on the risk
assessment, response, and monitoring alternatives under consideration); (iii) risk tolerance (e.g.,
levels of risk, types of risk, and degree of risk uncertainty that are acceptable); and (iv) priorities
and trade-offs (e.g., the relative importance of missions/business functions, trade-offs among
different types of risk that organizations face, time frames in which organizations must address
risk, and any factors of uncertainty that organizations consider in risk responses). The risk
framing component and the associated risk management strategy also include any strategic-level
decisions on how risk to organizational operations and assets, individuals, other organizations,
and the Nation, is to be managed by senior leaders/executives. 

3. The purpose of the risk assessment component is to
identify: (i) threats to organizations (i.e., operations, assets, or individuals) or threats directed
through organizations against other organizations or the Nation; (ii) vulnerabilities internal and
external to organizations;14 (iii) the harm (i.e., consequences/impact) to organizations that may
occur given the potential for threats exploiting vulnerabilities; and (iv) the likelihood that harm
will occur. The end result is a determination of risk (i.e., the degree of harm and likelihood of
harm occurring). To support the risk assessment component, organizations identify: (i) the tools,
techniques, and methodologies that are used to assess risk; (ii) the assumptions related to risk
assessments; (iii) the constraints that may affect risk assessments; (iv) roles and responsibilities;
(v) how risk assessment information is collected, processed, and communicated throughout
organizations; (vi) how risk assessments are conducted within organizations; (vii) the frequency
of risk assessments; and (viii) how threat information is obtained (i.e., sources and methods). 

4. The third component of risk management addresses how organizations respond to risk once that
risk is determined based on the results of risk assessments. The purpose of the risk response
component is to provide a consistent, organization-wide, response to risk in accordance with the
organizational risk frame by: (i) developing alternative courses of action for responding to risk;
(ii) evaluating the alternative courses of action; (iii) determining appropriate courses of action
consistent with organizational risk tolerance; and (iv) implementing risk responses based on
selected courses of action. To support the risk response component, organizations describe the
types of risk responses that can be implemented (i.e., accepting, avoiding, mitigating, sharing, or
transferring risk). Organizations also identify the tools, techniques, and methodologies used to
develop courses of action for responding to risk, how courses of action are evaluated, and how
risk responses are communicated across organizations and as appropriate, to external entities
(e.g., external service providers, supply chain partners).15

5. The fourth component of risk management addresses how organizations monitor risk over time.
The purpose of the risk monitoring component is to: (i) verify that planned risk response
measures are implemented and information security requirements derived from/traceable to
organizational missions/business functions, federal legislation, directives, regulations, policies,
and standards, and guidelines, are satisfied; (ii) determine the ongoing effectiveness of risk
response measures following implementation; and (iii) identify risk-impacting changes to
organizational information systems and the environments in which the systems operate.16 To
support the risk monitoring component, organizations describe how compliance is verified and
how the ongoing effectiveness of risk responses is determined (e.g., the types of tools, techniques,
and methodologies used to determine the sufficiency/correctness of risk responses and if risk
mitigation measures are implemented correctly, operating as intended, and producing the desired
effect with regard to reducing risk). In addition, organizations describe how changes that may
impact the ongoing effectiveness of risk responses are monitored. 

6. Likelihood
Organizations can employ a variety of approaches for determining the likelihood of threat events. Some organizations
treat the likelihood that a threat event will occur and the likelihood that, if it occurs, it will result in adverse effects as
separate factors, while other organizations assess threat likelihood as a combination of these factors. In addition, some
organizations prefer quantitative risk assessments while other organizations, particularly when the assessment involves
a high degree of uncertainty, prefer qualitative risk assessments. Likelihood determinations can be based on either
threat assumptions or actual threat data (e.g., historical data on cyber attacks, historical data on earthquakes, or specific
information on adversary capabilities, intentions, and targeting). When specific and credible threat data is available
(e.g., types of cyber attacks, cyber attack trends, frequencies of attacks), organizations can use the empirical data and
statistical analyses to determine more specific probabilities of threat events occurring. Organizations select a method
consistent with organizational culture and risk tolerance. Organizations can also make explicit assumptions concerning
the likelihood that a threat event will result in adverse effects as follows: (i) worst case (i.e., attack will be successful
unless strong, objective reasons to presume otherwise); (ii) best case (i.e., attack will not be successful unless specific,
credible information to the contrary); or (iii) something in between best and worst cases (e.g., the most probable case).
Organizations document any overarching assumptions. Organizations can use empirical data and statistical analyses to
help inform any of the approaches used to determine the likelihood of threat events occurring. Organizations select a
method consistent with organizational culture, understanding of the operational environment, and risk tolerance. 

7. RISK TOLERANCE --- THIS IS IMPORTANT BECAUSE OF THE THRESHOLD AND (the next topic) WAYS TO CLEAN QUARANTINE TRADEOFF
TASK 1-3: Identify the level of risk tolerance for the organization.
Supplemental Guidance: Risk tolerance is the level of risk that organizations are willing to accept in pursuit of strategic
goals and objectives. Organizations define information security-related risk tolerance organization-wide considering all
missions/business functions. Organizations can use a variety of techniques for identifying information security risk
tolerance (e.g., by establishing zones in a likelihood-impact trade space or by using a set of representative scenarios).
Organizations also define tolerance for other types of organizational and operational risks (e.g., financial, risk, safety
risk, compliance risk, or reputation risk). At Tier 2, mission/business owners may have different risk tolerances from
the organization as a whole. The risk executive (function) provides organizations with ways to resolve such differences
in risk tolerances at Tier 2. The level of residual risk accepted by authorizing officials for information systems or
inherited common controls is within the organizational risk tolerance, and not the individual risk tolerances of those
authorizing officials. In addition, organizations provide to Tier 2 and Tier 3, guidance on evaluating risk for specific
mission/business processes or information systems and a focus on near-term mission/business effectiveness with the
longer-term, strategic focus of the organizational risk tolerance. See Section 2.3.3 for additional information on risk
tolerance.
PRIORITIES AND TRADE-OFFS
TASK 1-4: Identify priorities and trade-offs considered by the organization in managing risk.
Supplemental Guidance: Risk is experienced at different levels, in different forms, and in different time frames. At Tier
1, organizations make trade-offs among and establish priorities for responding to such risks. Organizations tend to have
multiple priorities that at times conflict, which generates potential risk. Approaches employed by organizations for
managing portfolios of risks reflect organizational culture, risk tolerance, as well as risk-related assumptions and
constraints. These approaches are typically embodied in the strategic plans, policies, and roadmaps of organizations
which may indicate preferences for different forms of risk response. For example, organizations may be willing to
accept short-term risk of slightly degraded operations to achieve long-term reduction in information security risk.
However, this trade-off could be unacceptable for one particularly critical mission/business function (e.g., real-time
requirements in many industrial/process control systems). For that high-priority area, a different approach to improving
security may be required including the application of compensating security controls. 

8. Risk Determination and Uncertainty
Risk determinations require analysis of threat, vulnerability, likelihood, and impact-related information. Organizations
also need to examine mission/business vulnerabilities and threats where safeguards and/or countermeasures do not
exist. The nature of the inputs provided to this step (e.g., general, specific, strategic, tactical) directly affects the type of
outputs or risk determinations made. The reliability and accuracy of risk determinations are dependent on the currency,
accuracy, completeness, and integrity of information collected to support the risk assessment process. In addition, the
components of risk assessment results that affect reliability and accuracy of risk determinations also affect the amount
of uncertainty associated with those risk determinations and subsequent determinations. Organizations also consider
additional insights related to the anticipated time frames associated with particular risks. Time horizons associated with
potential threats can shape future risk responses (e.g., risk may not be a concern if the time horizon for the risk is in the
distant future). 

9. Risk Mitigation
Risk mitigation, or risk reduction, is the appropriate risk response for that portion of risk that cannot be accepted,
avoided, shared, or transferred. The alternatives to mitigate risk depend on: (i) the risk management tier and the scope 
of risk response decisions assigned or delegated to organizational officials at that tier (defined by the organizational
governance structures); and (ii) the organizational risk management strategy and associated risk response strategies.
The means used by organizations to mitigate risk can involve a combination of risk response measures across the three
tiers. For example, risk mitigation can include common security controls at Tier 1, process re-engineering at Tier 2,
and/or new or enhanced management, operational, or technical safeguards or countermeasures (or some combination of
all three) at Tier 3. Another example of a potential risk requiring mitigation can be illustrated when adversaries gain
access to mobile devices (e.g., laptop computers or personal digital assistants) while users are traveling. Possible risk
mitigation measures include, for example, organizational policies prohibiting transport of mobile devices to certain
areas of the world or procedures for users to obtain a clean mobile device that is never allowed to connect to the
organizational networks. 

10.
3.4 MONITORING RISK
Risk monitoring provides organizations with the means to: (i) verify compliance;
64 (ii) determine
the ongoing effectiveness of risk response measures; and (iii) identify risk-impacting changes to
organizational information systems and environments of operation. Analyzing monitoring results
gives organizations the capability to maintain awareness of the risk being incurred, highlight the
need to revisit other steps in the risk management process, and initiate process improvement
activities as needed.65 Organizations employ risk monitoring tools, techniques, and procedures to
increase risk awareness, helping senior leaders/executives develop a better understanding of the
ongoing risk to organizational operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, and the
Nation. Organizations can implement risk monitoring at any of the risk management tiers with
different objectives and utility of information produced. For example, Tier 1 monitoring activities
might include ongoing threat assessments and how changes in the threat space may affect Tier 2
and Tier 3 activities, including enterprise architectures (with embedded information security
architectures) and organizational information systems. Tier 2 monitoring activities might include,
for example, analyses of new or current technologies either in use or considered for future use by
organizations to identify exploitable weaknesses and/or deficiencies in those technologies that
may affect mission/business success. Tier 3 monitoring activities focus on information systems
and might include, for example, automated monitoring of standard configuration settings for
information technology products, vulnerability scanning, and ongoing assessments of security
controls. In addition to deciding on appropriate monitoring activities across the risk management
tiers, organizations also decide how monitoring is to be conducted (e.g., automated or manual
approaches) and the frequency of monitoring activities based on, for example, the frequency with
which deployed security controls change, critical items on plans of action and milestones, and
risk tolerance. 

11. Frequency of Monitoring
The frequency of risk monitoring (whether automated or manual) is driven by organizational missions/business
functions and the ability of organizations to use the monitoring results to facilitate greater situational awareness. An
increased level of situational awareness of the security state of organizational information systems and environments of
operation helps organizations develop a better understanding of risk. Monitoring frequency is also driven by other
factors, for example: (i) the anticipated frequency of changes in organizational information systems and operating
environments; (ii) the potential impact of risk if not properly addressed through appropriate response measures; and
(iii) the degree to which the threat space is changing. The frequency of monitoring can also be affected by the type of
monitoring conducted (i.e., automated versus procedural approaches). Depending on the frequency of monitoring 
required by organizations, in most situations, monitoring is most efficient and cost-effective when automation is
employed. Monitoring can provide significant benefits, especially in situations where such monitoring limits the
opportunities for adversaries to gain a foothold within organizations (either through information systems or the
environments in which those systems operate). When manual monitoring is employed by organizations, it is generally
not efficient to perform the monitoring with the frequency that automation allows. In some instances, infrequent
monitoring is not a major issue. For example, missions/business functions, facilities, legislation, policies, and
technologies tend to change on a more gradual basis and as such, do not lend themselves to frequent monitoring.
Instead, these types of changes are better suited to condition/event-based monitoring (e.g., if missions and/or business
functions change, then monitoring of such changes is appropriate to determine if the changes have any impact on risk). 





